# FBAuth #

This gem provides authentication and basic Facebook functions for your
Rails application.

## The Authentication Challenge ##

Facebook is an evolving platform, over the past couple years we've seen
a lot of change in how it authenticates users of third-party
applications.

The documentation for Facebook is minimal, without historic reference or
in-depth discussion of the different implementation scenarios that our
applications may take.

For example, the preferred method of doing "Canvas" applications, those
that live within the Facebook "wrapper" is now to use an iFrame. If you
choose to utilize the Javascript Connect SDK and rely on its
authentication mechanisms this will fail under any browsers that block
cross-domain cookies - which is more prominent as time goes on due to
the security risks involved in allowing cross-domain cookies.

Therefore, as of this writing, applications using the prescribed iFrame
style and using the JS SDK will fail on mobile Safari, Safari on
Windows' default settings, and various mobile implementations of the
Android browser.

This plugin uses a few techniques to locate your "access token" and
prefers to use the OAuth API to get what you need as a Facebook app to
ensure your users have correctly added your app, authenticated in
Facebook, and to communicate with the Graph and Query APIs.

Here are the scenarios we currently handle:

__iFrame Apps__

- first page load as an iFrame app inside Facebook, where authentication
  params are sent in the URL used for your iFrame
  - this is particularly required for mobile Safari and other browsers
    blocking cross-domain cookies by default
  - handles the old session parameter, as well as the new signed_request
    parameter

- loading from the cookie initialized by the JavaScript API
  - works great for browsers supporting cross-domain cookies by default

- the access token you get is time-limited, if it has expired you need
  to be re-authenticated

__External (Connect) Apps__

- handling an OAuth exchange back & forth with Facebook to handle
  authentication and capture URL parameters back for token

## Integration with Your Rails App ##

Add fbauth to your Gemfile

    gem 'fbauth', '~> 1.0'

Create `config/facebook.yml`

    development:
      app_id: 'xxxxxxxxxxxxx'
      app_context: 'my-app-dev'
      auth_path: '/login'
      canvas_url: 'http://dev.myapp.com/facebook'
      app_secret: 'xxxxxxxxxxxx'

    test:
      app_id: 'fake_id'
      app_context: 'my-app'
      auth_path: '/login'
      canvas_url: 'http://myapp.com/facebook'
      app_secret: 'fake_secret'

    production:
      app_id: 'xxxxxxxxxxxxx'
      app_context: 'my-app'
      auth_path: '/login'
      canvas_url: 'http://myapp.com/facebook'
      app_secret: 'xxxxxxxxxxxx'

- `app_id` - this is your Facebook App ID
- `app_context` - this is your Canvas Page path, ie.
  `http://apps.facebook.com/my-app-dev`
- `auth_path` - the path in your application to your login page (must be
  a string, not a logical route name)
- `canvas_url` - this is the Facebook Canvas URL, the base URL that gets
  to the Facebook iFrame pages for your Canvas app
- `app_secret` - the Facebook App Secret code for your application

Note: _We are assuming that you will be registering **two** facebook
applications, one that you will be using to actively develop your
application and the other for production use for your users._

Include the fbauth modules in your application controllers

    include FacebookAuthFunctions
    include FbauthHelper

In the controllers you want restricted to authorized users, or in your
`Application` controller, add the filters

    before_filter :require_facebook_auth

Create the controller and method that will live at your `auth_path`
specified in your facebook.yml file.

    class AuthController < ApplicationController

      # Use this if you've included FacebookAuthFunctions in your
      # Application controller...
      # skip_before_filter :require_facebook_auth

      def login
      end
    end

And then create your login template (we use HAML, but you can use ERB if
you want.

    %div.fblogin
      You are not logged in to Facebook, please click here:
      %fb:login-button{:perms => 'publish_stream'} Log In to Facebook

    %div.fbadd
      Please add this Application - it's great!
      %fb:login-button{:perms => 'publish_stream'} Add This Application

    %div.fbready
      Please wait...

    = fbauth_login_javascript(:login => '.fblogin', :add => '.fbadd', :ready => '.fbready')

The three areas noted above are exposed in the following scenarios:

- `:login` - this element is exposed when the user has not logged into
  Facebook, they may or may not have added your application but we don't
  know that yet.
- `:add` - this element is exposed when the user is logged in to
  Facebook but has not added / authorized your application. Note we are
  requesting certain permissions when the app is added:
  `<fb:login-button perms="publish_stream"></fb:login-button>`
- `:ready` - once the user has satisfied the pop-ups that appear when
  logging in and/or adding the application, or if the user loads this
  screen and is already fully authenticated, this element appears and
  a redirect is done to your application root_path

## Using the Facebook APIs ##

### Graph API ###

The Graph API gives you the ability to request a great deal of
information about individual social relationships and perform basic
updates to that graph (ie. posting news-feed events).

Certain actions (posting changes, reading certain restricted attributes)
are only available if you provide an access token and make an
authenticated call.

__Unauthenticated Call__

    graph = FacebookGraph.new
    graph.call('svetzal')

This will retrieve publicly available information on the provided user's
Facebook UID or handle in a Ruby hash structure.

    {"name"=>"Steven Vetzal", "gender"=>"male", "id"=>"849395216", "last_name"=>"Vetzal",
     "locale"=>"en_US", "link"=>"http://www.facebook.com/svetzal", "first_name"=>"Steven"}

__Authenticated Call__

    graph = FacebookGraph.new(fbauth.access_token)
    graph.call('svetzal', { :scope => "birthday" })

This will make a similar call but as an authenticated caller we can
request a restricted scope, in this case information about the user's
birthday (if our app has requested the birthday permission from the
user).

### Query API (FQL) ###

__Unauthenticated Call__

    query = FacebookQuery.new
    query.fql('SELECT name, first_name, last_name FROM user WHERE uid in ("849395216","58001611","1018515154")')

FQL is handy for performing multiple lookups at once, and can save you a
lot of latency.

    [
      {"name"=>"Steven Vetzal", "last_name"=>"Vetzal", "first_name"=>"Steven"},
      {"name"=>"Nate Smith", "last_name"=>"Smith", "first_name"=>"Nate"},
      {"name"=>"Craig Savolainen", "last_name"=>"Savolainen", "first_name"=>"Craig"}
    ]

__Authenticated Call__

    query = FacebookQuery.new(fbauth.access_token)

__Manually Building an Access Token__

If you scan your logs, you'll see the `signed_request` OAuth GET
parameter being sent to your application. You can manually build
yourself an authentication token from this using the following code.

    data = FacebookDecoder.decode('{"signed_request"=>"oXWWpLi2tX7QW3cjX...(removed)"}')
    fbauth = FacebookAuth.create(data)
    fbauth.validate

The `.validate` step is optional, but pre-warns you if the token you are
about to use is good. If it is not, you can find out why by looking at
`fbauth.validation_error`.

# Things Remaining Unclear #

Documentation for the Facebook platform is a little fragmented, so we
haven't (that we recall) come across the answers to these questions yet:

- what timezone is the OAuth token expiry value in? (we get it in Epoch,
  no TZ data, currently assuming San Francisco)
- what happens when time approaches the OAuth token expiry?
    - do we get a new one?
    - are we expected to stop functioning and redirect to a FB login?

# Change Log #

v1.2.0.4

- Added support for Facebook iFrame POST behaviour
- Fixed bug in Memcache client where we were using keys > 250 chars

v1.1.0.2

- Added memcached caching of Facebook GET data, 60 seconds expiry
- Fixed bug in Facebook JS SDK cookie interception for authentication

v1.0.0.2

- Fixed bug where timing instrumentation reporting CPU time rather than
  wall time

v1.0.0.1

- Added console application for quick testing, `script/console`

v1.0.0.0

- Changed call semantics for FacebookGraph and FacebookQuery,
  use objects instead of class methods
- Preparing for public release

v0.9.9.6
 
- Raising info-rich exceptions when errors returned from
  Facebook on graph calls
